---
layout: post
title: "Jekyll"
date: 2024-08-24 20:00:00 -600
categories: update
published: false
---

# A Character

**Who are they?** Software developer

**What do they want?** To develop their own blog site

# Has a problem

**Villain:** Developing a blog takes time

**External:** I want to develop my own blog site.

**Internal:** I want to present myself as an experienced developer.

**Philosophical:** It should be easy to express my skill and creativity through blogging.

# And meets a guide

**Empathy:** I know what it's like to try developing a blog engine from scratch

**Authority:** Architect

# Who gives them a plan

**Process:** Guide on setting up Jekyll and publishing a blog

# And calls them to action

**Direct:** Way to contact me to help them stand up their blog

**Transitional:** Link to my blog repository

# That helps them avoid failure

**Consequences:**

*   Not owning their content
*   Struggling to create a site
*   Not maintaining a professional online presence

# And ends in a success

**Consequences:**

*   Ability to express themselves
*   Coming across as skilled and professional
*   Complete ownership of content
*   Improved chances of landing a new job
*   Opportunity to master new ideas through blogging

# Blogging with Jekyll and GitHub pages

Hello, world, and welcome back to my blog!

Today I want to share how I used [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) to quickly and easily stand up a new blog site. But first, why should every knowledge worker from scientist to designer be blogging? Let's dive into it!

# Cultivating presence and growth

I don't know many knowledge workers who aren't interested in career growth. Whether you're a developer, an editor, or an accountant, it's likely that you hone your craft. But continuous improvement can become challenging with time. It takes hard work to build and maintain momentum over your career.

I've found several mid-career knowledge workers solving this problem by blogging. An active blog creates a professional online presence and projects authority. This is invaluable in situations where a weak online presence could cost opportunities. You'll enjoy having a blog to share when you're looking to land a new job or to close with a client.

The benefits of blogging extend far beyond presence. More than branding, maintaining a blog leads to accelerated personal growth. The act of blogging alone is a powerful tool for mastering new skills. Expressing something new to others with clarity is a sure sign of real learning. A well-managed blog makes it obvious to others that you're serious about your field. It's such an effective use of time that I've spent a good deal of mine learning about blogging. 

Of course there are many excellent platforms out there for blogging. Names that immediately come to mind are [Medium](https://medium.com/), [Blogger](https://www.blogger.com/), and [WordPress](https://wordpress.com/). And yet, as a software developer, the excitement of launching a new blog begs the question: can I build it myself?

# Managing complexity

At first glance a blogging site like Medium appears too complex for the lone developer to manage. It's clear that a serious investment of time is being made into a squeaky clean interface. There's also a database supporting blog posts, account management, and payment processing. There are full-blown recommender systems tailoring the articles you see.

This much work could seem daunting for a developer only looking to build an online presence. Even a professional likely doesn't have experience with all these technologies. It's fortunate, then, that we don't need most of them!

You can launch, manage, and even host your own blog site for free and in less than an hour. You don't need a fancy database. You don't even need to build the site yourself, although you could to showcase your web design skills. This is all made possible through the power of [static site generators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_site_generator) (SSGs). In the rest of this blog I'll break down what exactly an SSG is before walking you through how I use an SSG to power my blog.

# Static and dynamic web content

The ideas behind SSGs are straightforward. Let's start by understanding what it means to call a website static.

When you navigate to a [web](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Wide_Web) page a web server responds with some HTML content that your web browser can render. The primary difference between a static and dynamic website is in how the server stores and forms that content.

We store static site content as HTML files on a web server. When a user requests a web page, we respond with the corresponding `.html` file. We create this content in advance and serve the exact same content for each request. This means that a given web page should look the same to any user viewing it.

Static websites are simple and easy to deploy, but can be difficult to maintain at scale. We get stuck editing many individual HTML files (we'll circle back to this).

Dynamic websites take a more flexible approach to storing web content. We can store content in a database and generate the HTML to serve for each request. This allows for content to be dynamically formed for individual users. In this case the same web page could look different for different users. This means we can support robust user interaction at the cost of much added complexity.

Frequently updated web content is best served by a dynamic website. An example of this might be a website serving realtime stock exchange data to investors. It would be infeasible to continuously update static HTML files with the latest data. A better plan would be to dynamically convert streaming data to HTML content on a given request.

Web content that is infrequently updated can be well served by a static website. A blog is actually a great example of this. We can store individual blog posts as HTML files and serve them to our readers statically. 

Still, it would be tedious to maintain so many HTML files individually. Consider wanting to make a simple change to your site header. Given static files, you'd likely have header content spread out across every blog post. What seems like it should be a small change now requires modifying each individual post!

It's clear that this isn't workable long-term. One popular solution to this problem is static site generation.

# Static site generation

SSGs 

# Hosting with GitHub Pages